Both are 'tranditional vigenere ciphers'.  
That is all uppercase letters are converted to lower and 
all non-alphabetic entries are ignored.

YOU MUST:
  Crack the Cipher
    Create an algorithm for deciphering it
      You don't need to create 1 algorithm to do it all or the exploration, but
      you must be able to show your work.

  Give a solid explanation of how you figured it out!

Easy
Ciphertext:
mlwkxjgkx, zwkbpq b leq ngxg rhy, er yvaxghk, vtpd rhyj lhpwfg eklxqter, ek b
aenx vseftrvxw cgn. trv tl ede aenx gsl ytmla, liwd ri vbemyxgxdr trv mxeua hrw
tgslaxv ohkhk hy aalwse; rxe, kxxo qx hyl hy xzx uikm usgdl agkww gy pmkwhq;
kxxo dxtvfbgk, woxr tr lxmwr efw tpkh uc xtbxz. hkksgbdw rhyjlxpnxl; tjxiejx
xzwkr rwxwjme mlagz; efw xwltupala e zhnww, xoif t asmlx sx ikeqxk, e zhnww hy
jslmmfz, t lgnli gy yeama, e zhnww hy pwtkragz, e zhnww hy kdhkc, s ahykx hj
gkwij, t asmlx sx zhh; latx qhnv agvsebgkk ftc tx br lax rsfx sx mai dhkh; latx
qhnv gnmkgbgkk ftc tx br lax rsfx sx mai dhkh; latx see cgnk wsenxsmbsfl feq ux
mf mai ftfi gy mlw ehvv, pbxz nipaymiv atrvl nrlh mlw fhwl abkz. maijxysjx,
vislx jjhf ede rsmk emyam whxxgzxl, jjhf ede eemzaxwk, yvgf tpd rhyj enwlynp
vxlmjxl, jjhf ede rsmk ivawx efw emyam-qagwivgxwk, tgh xkhq see cgnk aavdiv
whmfzl. ehihmfm tqggz cgnkwweoik t misvaij, tgh dxm rgm tpd ux whhdikfxr sm
hrux; uyl exx ggx whxto sm t xafx efw eil tep dblxwg nrlh amk ltcagzw, latx oaxr
see lsox whhdif mael tep etr fw xwmxbxh gy tpd, tgh latx woxvq ftr etr lsox ef
xjyse ivaobpwzx. wwx mlsm ri dhoi ggx efhmlwk; vislx xg ux ggoxxgnl; pwtkr lh
bqhtkx ggx xg tgslaxv sl mlw zhwhxe vwjnmjxl. gwtli lh ui awei; uxtww mh fw
nggdxtr; uxtww mh jagw jsnex ggx aama efhmlwk; vislx xg leiwi esfzxv latr al
giwwyyd; kxxakx xg mac txw iskec, latx qx feq ghx tx piskr; ejbli wtkpq, mael
rhyj uhhaxl efw rsmk fmfwl qsr ui agomyhkelxw. efw tfgox ede mlagzw, uehxzx
rsmklidoxw obml lax fggw sx vaejbmc, sl pmla t qsgmpw, pamua bw lax fggw sx
ixvxxvxfxlw sgw twtvi. hktc sepeql, mlsm ri etr rgm yeagm, yfmbp a vhqw. uxlgew,
efw es, a pbpd vhqw jnmudec, sgw vwvxmnx rsm ngxg frwwey. eexg. efw tksbg, xzx
hvvxk sx mai zhnww ikihtkiv yhv lax tjxlmvxggq hy xzx lgzhhp gy mlw ikshaxxk,
xlxsuemkaxh xhk xzxbv aglxjnvxahg mf tep labryl mlsm tvw xqtwwbifm ysj maie,
xoif yhv see xzx hjxbvijl hj lax gznkgz, hk mf hmlwk psjwl, xzhli oah ejx vedexh
lh mlw fbralmvq bg xzx vlmkvl, txzmfgbry tm xzx amya ivaxlxk, xoif whaf mh xzx
wisvhrk— tgh labw katpd ux xzx hvvxk sx mai zhnww hy xzx ivwlbhwgvc gy mlw
lvlghe: lw mael bl ehihmfmxh lh ui hkxwawxrl, hk xwtvlwk, llsee fw yhyfw
lxsgwmfz br zbl tdtvi, ag mlw ahykx plava wztep tx ivwitvww ysj abq. laxvwyhvw,
ax wztep tx ymjlm mf mai zhnww hy kgw, br s ieeux mlsm mlw vhrykxksmbsf bg xzx
asmlx qsr aisk amk phvvl vejxyyder efw wmkmbrumec, fhm aama pgnw whxxgz. tgh
oaxr zx vsexml agms lax lgnli gy zsv, yhv zx llgneh tx ymjlm mf mai
zhnww—uxlgew, xzbl mk uxemmbjme, mlsm ai etr fw tg iptftdx— eil abq gyyij
abqkxej ag ivsrxv mihr zbl ofxxw txysjx zsv, bg xgdxr gk kiexffjtggw hy xzx
xzwkeekmbry vhzwgtrl. tgh oaxr sgr wztep uhfi ag tjlxk laf, eil mai lxtgzxk
ejbli, sgw, aama yhebjlxw lsgww lh aisoxr, qxt, inxg hakxgler, wsenxw abw
tkhxzxk sj ukilakif pbxz maikx psjwl: ejm mlgn t fjhmlwk hv tkxxzkxr? a ltpmmx
cgn br lax rsfx sx mai dhkh bxlyk vavalm, mf mhowg hv jxfieukefvx sx mai
woxvdtlxagz ggoxrsgm, mf pamua vsnxgefm b vwvxmnx rsm mh jweesolamh, bg e
vxmijfbrsmbsf mael bl jaqxh, affsntupw, tgh mgvlsgzisuei, lh ui qhnv xkbifw trv
ukslaxv laksmza xzx zvsvx sx zhh ag mlw uhrvl hj dhoi, lh pedd br see xzx
vseftrvfxrll hj yhw fdtfidxlw, ag mlsgdwybomfz, ysjxoij tgh woxv. sfxr. sgw lw
mael bl jgngh mgpsjmac gy mlal lednmelbhr katpd ghx ztoi hetgw tfsfz rsm; yhv qx
llsee rgm lyxyxv latx ebgi zhnww laede ui hhepmmxh tr ame. tgh zx mlsm vsexml ag
trv bl jsbmlxne fwyhvw fx, efw bw s ukslaxv, gk bj laxc tx uvwmavwg, mlwr llsee
wsenxw mai hkxwawxrl hk xwtvlwk pmla ntdbyxww aefwl xg axenxg, aama xzbl wsfx
tjtrij tgh uhoiftgx, gk uc ktrmfz tqwg, br lhdif hy xzx leex. uizheh, nxkmdr, b
wsr nrlh rsm, mamk bl ef xgwsfipw ngxg rhy xhk e kteyltmmgg ms ggx efhmlwk br
lax lgnli gy zsv, bg xzx lgzhhp gy mlw ikshaxxk. tgh qx tvw vtpdxw xg wh xzbl fq
ikeqxk efw mlsgdwybomfz, tw lax whbkml laede zmnx nxlxkefvx mf tep qhnv vhbryl
br lax lgnli gy mlw ehvv, bg xzx lgzhhp gy mlw ikshaxxk, mael bm qsr uiuhfi s
ltrumnejr, t xsuxvftvpw hy xzx asdr ltakbx lh rsmk xhaybgsmbsf. tgh qx llsee rgm
kiuxbzw tgc sfhry rhy agms labw kvasge lenx ai al vpwtg jjhf xzx upghw sx mamk
zxrwktxahg; efw ai katpd ux vwvxmnxw fq mai gkwmftggw hy xzx pekabry hy jwxm,
jgk nrlh mlal xrv ptw lax sjwbrsgvi gy mlw ptwzbgk gy yiwm brkmbxmmxh. sgw
eytbr, lax sjwbrsgvi gy pekabry yxil bl xg ux evfbralmijxw fq mai hkxwawxrl, hk
tjxlmvbgk wewij hy xzx vlmkvl. am bw lh ui uhfqwgviv pbxz ikeqxk; efw tjlxk
tskmecbgk gy uvwtw efw pmfx, ai al ms ybkh zbfwwey euvhvvbgk lh mlw itxlxkr
yboif bg xzx mlakmiwgml uattlxk sx chlf’l mikmbqggr gggvijgbry fx. eexg.

Plaintext:
therefore, verily i say unto you, my friends, call your solemn assembly, as i
have commanded you. and as all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one
another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom;
seek learning, even by study and also by faith. organize yourselves; prepare
every needful thing; and establish a house, even a house of prayer, a house of
fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of
order, a house of god; that your incomings may be in the name of the lord; that
your outgoings may be in the name of the lord; that all your salutations may be
in the name of the lord, with uplifted hands unto the most high. therefore,
cease from all your light speeches, from all laughter, from all your lustful
desires, from all your pride and light-mindedness, and from all your wicked
doings. appoint among yourselves a teacher, and let not all be spokesmen at
once; but let one speak at a time and let all listen unto his sayings, that when
all have spoken that all may be edified of all, and that every man may have an
equal privilege. see that ye love one another; cease to be covetous; learn to
impart one to another as the gospel requires. cease to be idle; cease to be
unclean; cease to find fault one with another; cease to sleep longer than is
needful; retire to thy bed early, that ye may not be weary; arise early, that
your bodies and your minds may be invigorated. and above all things, clothe
yourselves with the bond of charity, as with a mantle, which is the bond of
perfectness and peace. pray always, that ye may not faint, until i come. behold,
and lo, i will come quickly, and receive you unto myself. amen. and again, the
order of the house prepared for the presidency of the school of the prophets,
established for their instruction in all things that are expedient for them,
even for all the officers of the church, or in other words, those who are called
to the ministry in the church, beginning at the high priests, even down to the
deacons— and this shall be the order of the house of the presidency of the
school: he that is appointed to be president, or teacher, shall be found
standing in his place, in the house which shall be prepared for him. therefore,
he shall be first in the house of god, in a place that the congregation in the
house may hear his words carefully and distinctly, not with loud speech. and
when he cometh into the house of god, for he should be first in the
house—behold, this is beautiful, that he may be an example— let him offer
himself in prayer upon his knees before god, in token or remembrance of the
everlasting covenant. and when any shall come in after him, let the teacher
arise, and, with uplifted hands to heaven, yea, even directly, salute his
brother or brethren with these words: art thou a brother or brethren? i salute
you in the name of the lord jesus christ, in token or remembrance of the
everlasting covenant, in which covenant i receive you to fellowship, in a
determination that is fixed, immovable, and unchangeable, to be your friend and
brother through the grace of god in the bonds of love, to walk in all the
commandments of god blameless, in thanksgiving, forever and ever. amen. and he
that is found unworthy of this salutation shall not have place among you; for ye
shall not suffer that mine house shall be polluted by him. and he that cometh in
and is faithful before me, and is a brother, or if they be brethren, they shall
salute the president or teacher with uplifted hands to heaven, with this same
prayer and covenant, or by saying amen, in token of the same. behold, verily, i
say unto you, this is an ensample unto you for a salutation to one another in
the house of god, in the school of the prophets. and ye are called to do this by
prayer and thanksgiving, as the spirit shall give utterance in all your doings
in the house of the lord, in the school of the prophets, that it may become a
sanctuary, a tabernacle of the holy spirit to your edification. and ye shall not
receive any among you into this school save he is clean from the blood of this
generation; and he shall be received by the ordinance of the washing of feet,
for unto this end was the ordinance of the washing of feet instituted. and
again, the ordinance of washing feet is to be administered by the president, or
presiding elder of the church. it is to be commenced with prayer; and after
partaking of bread and wine, he is to gird himself according to the pattern
given in the thirteenth chapter of john’s testimony concerning me. amen.

Hard
Ciphertext:
gzvz qdzzvxqk...                                                  1

    ...av prdz lptr oi nqyo kdux rg oewj da ipx tgmtm bi bwm
    zsahv.
                 ohllt dhgui
         zb vv ic qfngvkiaw icl imhycie iirb mfsx
         kpvqoh ikc fsk iyzina pfsx kprb atmf.

    y kqrty vyjikc aqror dxemtpk se apumtv.    amei mqqhw.      ipx
    bgpgpvq aiiwgmq rb fhi lwkjv.

                 klqqh ddqvc (useb'q)
         iwg qgqleekr, rv ipx ndeemg higba, ksr yiq
         dtlirq swjczhl iptr zi nif wpt uhql
         mebrotxoxll wgmplmh wvamtpqaj bwm ijsrvb,
         vqaimtb gj kpr wpxzw kgwk qawmatbewrk
         eulkw etq, ar wipw, mcbbpwpp ipfcgimc.

    llv lboxwqgq hiinbuu; amtnarx buuwjoa fgsga, rwk.

                 vcbbw zfqph (kdvm'b)
         llv arfwcl fmkx zvghtaqzcfx tzrdbjzxq
         oiim, bi kdckqw, hftckqca pfg glzvrchtr
         cfslou kis thly oewjq wu bac aqgmagqco
         wckxicpwqdv hd llv xydvtb xyjxy. buhg wiw
         kshv unqg pbmcetka gr iamkr eeesvql iw mfw
         hrvthz, qcm kgwk ws wptqk agqdcalkpbbmfw
         nmeh uxablliixehbtl tq sqlavqo pbmcetka gr
         xjvvf xsfbodtaa hp olzagom uwk rahsqgv, ad
         bacq immawcptew vitqqhl ipxw osltq ompdx
         csvkp ob bwmbp gae urdvh.

    bacq pvic pistr, bwwgmedbttr. fakyme dvs pbezii...

                 ohllt dhgui (twaw'l)
         ipx jswk mihz swenzme urvapox usw
         dqflvimknjikmq da p anphvzavqoag
         lmhlzaglkpbxb sxkmzsb iw wm s hfcoom-
         qivioeil frutzlympk buuwjoa y zsfx jkqam
         pfawktvqo ipx "qlei-acdvvtxb teevru" jjb
         bl xetb gkm bmlqskv env bwql...
         "qg pfvt dvs bayfoj nbu iat mfw jzau."

    wqitxq jsct - (sxta avpwie 35uz lupoxq)

    vscxulvh txyh smme dvs qgrwvrkg zqip mfw sgmalvv bbrdij.
    jehiipmycmeo frutzlympka, odkz neghw, tpbumdokyhlvl gr i
    qcszq fvzxomn-amwdi jwaj kptecv, "wf tbqo pvw rzeesf iwg
    iej llv nvvp." lm xlv azbu d exlx qzsk ws dta bac
    vscxulvh rnkhmeo bxb dn mfw xfx bi ngifc, tyk buhg cmocj
    gfur eirs wmor. kqyw ce bh y kxrzeb vxoar kop - buh
    ldtifarj pnym kiggklvl.

    rql iqmjww

    ra alowb msjrj bb pwgvbly, av prdz rtbac, xyma...

                         ywxkx mf vrlvr
                 ...ih exjd ej ard edzeb gvciagw pvw qsr
                 uqrjw gmimjxzvt wptqk bgpgpvqa wioc
                 ecjbruqdcljq hzansxtikcv smmeqqvpm.

                                                           amx kw:

2                                                       3.
                 ukov 3zw pwzzarg lgiyr 8/8/03


    ark. iewpjz wcfx'j jrgzdwf - kgveqaj                        2

    kawlc gr kpr ftdkd pshzw suwb eagul kpr ywxkx ceeeigha.
    p ptlv wycgv qi wyd. svkphu ltvm gk enixh. 30'a. zqgb
    xetmq. kqh nxcl prvq smgnxalpp qa vtxxicjw ra uh aiigbk
    eel fkcuneck slb bi pxa ocjc emnw jjb ocjc swelvv zhme.

3   me buh jpbapgsd - iewpjz zyjkcmf lv uzhll sw buh uxzkmj.    3
    lv jrqlh wocj xf aclb gmocspzvt d gttemo fltygwomk
    rzvfctk bwm pgfhfe, puiltbly xfenul wql fgyjm. n wmp
    sxrlpv eulaitxq g.w.

4   zvg. dzipnp vieb'f nqikacf - gfvglvjwnq                     4

    svkphu atbl rzi emjvxpxxp (omkp gkm wmtbdmem "qrtepblk
    zrvvvp") dv mfw xrjyh, ztuhtww kpr nmibec. vsvaa'w vdbbaw
    xyzbxow bac omelbz 3 udzx jsvxm lhtawp zmpclbcmga.

    ac hslzf d kjx hd lir, arwa ipx ngx uwjq vtfm m zmj
    ubeqam ifgrv. pr sqrsl gl yg, agdzta tr s hzovwia xamls
    fv gkm hkkcwr fn uluhmed sru i ihzn xkclxp ebpic (bkgumr)
    ig d kdamsei giewg.

    wm ipwwjmf wpt xamfi kw ula wmtb sw zn vw etzx y uscl
    pruezxqk. wllqhvag, mfwvv'a n owjl ksefcqaj w.h. bac
    lir khs zpbmjww. rzgkcg thmcw fcg wpt eblvsn. vbz pt
    axck xym oxtalhxwvj.

    buh bti vsh wyigwmga hl llv nyrwg.
                                                     knr ls:
5   vfg. dzipnp vieb'f kwjax - kgveqaj                          5

    igbasj, himfvms qg nsnrunv icl kmti, cqrv qc bac vmib vq
    ngwgr gj r jhotswscj, fcwpnqco br xvfu qhaizhwarx pvv
    pdclc. zi pmyoa xvmm zmj ubeqam ifgrv.

                       iewpjz
                  (blls gpbqm)
              lptr vs pwh pmpv ac'k kfvr rci bh jmrtp?
              lrc yclr kezl uh epa lrapc ig eztiddswk!

    ue. szdalcj, e scehijkkyl, pviav wkmk faq.

                      gzbvatz
              vmei fns lb, bz. wcfx. pwh fic'b egw me
              nervi wy rzi scyoldhxpk jfzrymg.

                      ikrzyi
              q'z jibm. pc'dp jmr zpd znqlw wqevb.

                      ezhqkii
              bula qgiykw yif jwi bh zw flqyw icl br'k
              kfqaj bd jx zmmcb. lrc hphsdh yiih uplx
              wgyi xerbtam kgrkpf dod.

                      ikrzyi
              buh nxzlr a lvieg wu qm usw nprq i lwkieee
              knpm nmlrwvuil. l ihsxb aj ym'q fwbm mm
              upvia wpt eblvsna, nql wm lyah ym'q fwbm
              mm vidwylaw bac zslar. km sqwl'l xvty pm
              gqzfl enil rn rwnpki. wqevb wm pghiu i
              prcetx mx azvqreh igb ulrzthl bm muwrkg
              dxqs. bacf lv bbol bm.
                                                (vmfxzvhhl)

5                                                          4.
                   wpze 3jh imilatl wpsjk 8/8/03


    kbqbxvncv:                                                   5

    xym oxtalhxwv uzvymg, thmcmeo txqabr, bmgba ohpxvw rzi
    jbrhzxvz uzivt. cuwhaxp jidwiha ettlk jiwz kqh jkgwjtifh.

                         xgwlqwv
                 cwbn. bwmlc hprvf kikm ucwr fv qlaettw sx
                 kpr stpvggfk fnslkt vhu xsi i lhig.

                         ikrzyi
                 wa gqhxeyq? m yiq ww vw wmor kw n fmattp!

                         hvfafhz
                 iptr'k xym qlaettw vigiewutvm.

                         yjxyce
                 l mkmgrmectl iwjvw rzid qa wpt jhrlsd ws d
                 tdkdcv jztvqo riugfik qa d lxanqwh
                 ciidbdzr uaxy i floc wg rzi uwbu apgbly
                 'fvenum dn mfw pvwcdzs'.

                         xkmkwvz
                 zu. ltvm, fszv gbx icg bbwe ywj pcrp
                 wyeexm gkii jnjdhfhru edceb kywnru qu q
                 cskx cmg lb gwej kxiivjpi wocj cfc?

                         nubwck
                 fga dcpk?

                         xgwlqwv
                 ewah ii iej.

                         xsil (b.v.)
                   (ibmkguee ipfmcb)
                 tplllz!

Plaintext:
over darkness... 1

...we hear what we will come to know as the voice of the
guide.
guide voice
it is an important and popular fact that
things are not always what they seem.

a small square image appears on screen. home video. the
dolphin stadium at sea world.

guide voice (cont'd)
for instance, on the planet earth, man had
always assumed that he was the most
intelligent species occupying the planet,
instead of the third most intelligent
which was, in fact, entirely accurate.

the dolphins perform; leaping through hoops, etc.

guide voice (cont'd)
the second most intelligent creatures
were, of course, dolphins who curiously
enough had long known of the impending
destruction of the planet earth. they had
made many attempts to alert mankind to the
danger, but most of their communications
were misinterpreted as amusing attempts to
punch footballs or whistle for tidbits, so
they eventually decided they would leave
earth by their own means.

they leap madly, desperately. higher and higher...

guide voice (cont'd)
the last ever dolphin message was
misinterpreted as a surprisingly
sophisticated attempt to do a double-
backward somersault through a hoop while
whistling the "star-spangled banner" but
in fact the message was this...
"so long and thanks for all the fish."

titles roll - (full screen 35mm images)

dolphins leap over and interact with the opening titles.
breathtaking somersaults, back flips, choreographed to a
buzby berkley-style song called, "so long and thanks for
all the fish." we end with a wide shot of all the
dolphins jumping out of the top of frame, but they never
come back down. tilt up to a starry night sky - the
dolphins have vanished.

end titles

as night turns to morning, we hear click, then...

voice on radio
...as well as sea world orlando and san
diego reporting their dolphins have
mysteriously disappeared overnight.

cut to:

2 3.
hhgg 3rd revised draft 8/8/03


int. arthur dent's bedroom - morning 2

close on the clock radio from which the voice emanates.
a hand shuts it off. arthur dent is awake. 30's. kind
faced. his feet land perfectly in slippers as he stands
and shuffles out of his very neat but very boring room.

3 in the bathroom - arthur gargles in front of the mirror. 3
he bends over to spit revealing a yellow bulldozer
through the window, crawling toward his house. a tea
kettle whistles o.s.

4 int. arthur dent's kitchen - continuous 4

arthur sets the newspaper (with the headline "dolphins
vanish") on the table, removes the kettle. doesn't notice
through the window 3 more large yellow bulldozers.

he pours a cup of tea, sets the pot down next o his
mobile phone. he picks it up, stares at a digital photo
on the screen of himself and a very pretty woman (tricia)
at a costume party.

he presses the phone to his head as if it were a cold
compress. suddenly, there's a loud rumbling o.s. the
tea cup rattles. arthur looks out the window. now he
sees the bulldozers.

the tea cup shatters on the floor.
cut to:
5 ext. arthur dent's house - morning 5

arthur, dressed in pajamas and robe, lies in the dirt in
front of a bulldozer, blocking it from destroying his
house. he yells into his mobile phone.

arthur
(into phone)
what do you mean he's gone out to lunch?
you just said he was still at breakfast!

mr. prosser, a bureaucrat, leans over him.

prosser
come off it, mr. dent. you can't lie in
front of the bulldozers forever.

arthur
i'm game. we'll see who rusts first.

prosser
this bypass has got to be built and it's
going to be built. you should have made
your protest months ago.

arthur
the first i heard of it was when a workman
came yesterday. i asked if he'd come to
clean the windows, and he said he'd come
to demolish the house. he didn't tell me
right away of course. first he wiped a
couple of windows and charged me twenty
quid. then he told me.
(continued)

5 4.
hhgg 3rd revised draft 8/8/03


continued: 5

the bulldozer driver, looking guilty, ducks behind the
steering wheel. prosser removes plans from his briefcase.

prosser
look. these plans have been on display at
the planning office now for a year.

arthur
on display? i had to go down to a cellar!

prosser
that's the display department.

arthur
i eventually found them in the bottom of a
locked filing cabinet in a disused
lavatory with a sign on the door saying
'beware of the leopard'.

prosser
mr. dent, have you any idea how much
damage that bulldozer would suffer if i
just let it roll straight over you?

arthur
how much?

prosser
none at all.

ford (o.s.)
(american accent)
arthur!
